Hello everyone and welcome to part six while loops so let's learn a bit about while loops and javascript's
and loops in general.
Allow us to automatically repeat blocks of code and the while loop will continually execute code as
long as condition remains true.
And like I mentioned for the previous lecture if you're already familiar five loops from another programming
language you may just want to check the notes for this lecture and just reference the syntax changes
yourself.
OK in case you're new to a WHILE loop Let's see what it actually looks like.
So in Javascript the while loop looks like this.
You say the keyword while and then print sees you have some sort of condition and then inside the curly
brackets you execute some code and that code is going to be continually executed while that condition
is true and something to be careful with while loops is if you have a condition that will always remain
true no matter what the that while loop will execute forever and that may lead to buggy code because
your while loop just never breaks it always stays running forever.
OK let's see some actual examples.
And we're also going to learn about a few key words such as the break word which will break out of a
top level block of code.
Let's jump to her editor to get started.
OK so just like last time I have an HMO I'll script that's connected to my javascript this my script
that Jap's and that in turn has HDMI connected to this browser.
So let's get started with a very simple while example going to create a variable called X and set it
equal to zero.
And then I can begin typing while enter.
Adam helps me out the rest of the context.
So I say a while x is less than 5.
That's the condition I want.
I'm going to perform some action.
I will log x is currently and then I'm going to say plus X here so that prints out and then I'm also
going to log x is still less than 5 adding one to X and then finally to make sure this doesn't run forever.
I'm going to say x is equal to x plus 1.
So before we run this let's break down what's actually happening here.
I start off with X equals zero.
This is outside this while loop than inside this while loop.
I'll say while X is less than 5 I want you to execute this block of code in the first block of code
or the first line of code on line 4 says just X is currently and then whatever the current number of
x's and then as long as X is still less than 5.
My condition.
I'll also log.
X is still less than 5.
Adding one to X and then finally on line 7.
I'll say x is equal to x plus 1.
So I re-assign X to the current X plus 1 and also show you later on some syntax to have a shortcut.
Doing this sort of operation will save that and let's run a browser or a refresher browser page here
and see what we get.
So we get a lot of output.
Let's expand this and see what's happening here.
So I get X is currently zero.
That makes sense.
So it's still less than 5.
Add 1 2 x x currently 1 and this keeps going all the way until it prints out.
X is currently 4.
Which makes sense if X is currently 4.
I would log.
X is still less than 5 adding 1 to x.
And note that once I add 1 to X then X becomes 5 and 5 is no longer less than 5 it's equal to 5.
So the while loop stops operating.
Which is why we never see X is currently fired and that's the very basics of how a while loop works.
OK now let's add in some manual brake conditions which will exit out of the loop and it's going to use
the keyword break.
So right now I start with variable x is equal to zero.
I'll say while X is less than 5 and I'm going to cancel again log x is currently X and then here I'm
going to add in some control flow with an if statement
and I will say if x is equal to 3 I'm going to log x is equal to three and that's all different now.
So let's run this code again and see what happens.
So looks like very much the same code 0 1 2 3.
Except when X is currently 3 before I say X is less than 5 I get this big announcement x is equal to
3.
Now let's actually try to break the while loop on this certain condition and then we can do that is
by adding in the special key word break.
And this will break out of the top level loop.
It's in basically what says what this is saying is if x is equal to three log this and then break out
of the top level loop you find this key word in.
And it happens to be this while.
So let's save this expand this and refresh the page.
And now we see when I refresh it stops at this as x is equal to three line.
So it says x is equal to 3 and then it breaks out of that while loop.
And that's how we can use the keyword break to essentially prematurely break out of a while loop so
that we don't have to wait until this condition is actually meant to be false.
And that's really all there is to the While loop.
We'll use it later on in the course.
But as a quick exercise I want you to do this right a while loop that prints out only the even numbers
from 1 to 10.
So again just to clarify what I want you to do right now.
All right in here as a comments write a while loop prints out only the even numbers from 1 to 10.
OK so positivity You see if you can do it on your own and then I'm going to write out the solution for
this question.
Just write a while loop that prints out only the even numbers from 1 to 10.
OK so let's get started with this.
I'm going to clear everything I have here my editor.
Hopefully you were able to actually do this yourself or at least attempt it yourself.
But everything is clear.
So let's try it out.
OK.
So let's see how we can attempt to solve this problem.
First thing I'm going to do is create a variable called numb and started off equal to 1.
Then I'm going to create my while loop and I want to go from numbers 1 to 10.
So I will say while my number is less than 11 and let's just start off with a very simple example I
will log the number and then say num is equal to nonplus 1 saved this.
And let's see if this works.
Refresh the page and here I get all the numbers from 1 to 10 but the assignment is to only print out
these even numbers.
So I need some sort of method to check the numbers even and hopefully you remember from the number or
the very basics of javascript lecture the very first javascript lecture we touch you the maade operator.
So I'm going to say if numb model 2 is equal to zero then I can do something and I know that the number
is even.
So I will walk that number.
So what does that actually mean.
Well remember that model checks for remainder.
And I know if the number divided by two leaves the remainder equal to zero.
And that number is even.
So Six divided by two has no remainder.
Eight divided by two is the remainder etc..
OK.
And then lastly I want to make sure this doesn't run forever.
So outside of that if I'm going to say Num. is equal to 1 so let's say that and see if our first page
it works.
And there we have it two four six eight 10.
And those are all the even numbers from 1 to 10 Using a while loop.
Take your time.
This was a little confusing for you and some key things to remember here is this Ma'at operator.
This is a really common way to check of the numbers even and also key to this is to remember to increase
the number and to remember to increase the number outside of the if statement.
If you only had it inside of this statement that would cause problems because you would only be adding
one if the number was even.
You want to do it on the odd numbers and you can tell if something is within the block using these clearly
brackets as indicators and indentation for javascript.
Doesn't matter a whole lot although you should try to keep code readable and clean later on when we
talk about Python indentation is going to be a huge aspect of it.
OK.
So thanks everyone and I will see you at the next lecture.
We're going to begin to discuss for loops.
I'll see you there.